Hello and welcome back to the course on Tableau.
In the previous tutorial we did all of the groundwork in connecting to our data sources.
And today we get to do the fun part.
We get to create the facilitation.
So what will we be talking about today.
Well first of all of course we'll be talking about blending and more advanced blending so you will see
a real life example of how to apply blending and get results.
And also you will learn how to do a dual axis chart too.
Well we'll show you how to create a dual axis charts today which is quite a valuable skill to have in
terms of your tableau dash boarding and creating cool visuals.
So let's get straight to it here.
As you recall we have two datasets more data sources list of orders plus order breakdown which will
tell us the dates when certain items were sold or when orders were made and how those orders are broken
down into two different items.
And what's the sales on those items.
And also we have the sales targets data set which gives us the targets for our sales for the different
departments for the separate months.
So as you recall the level of granularity for these two data sources is different sales targets are
at the level of detail of a category and list of orders plus order a breakdown are actually at a much
more granular level they are at the level of items which constitute orders.
So let's go ahead and start creating our visual to start off with we're going to want to visualize by
a month.
So we're going to drag the order data into columns and we're going to convert this into month.
So we're already used to that we know what's going on here.
Next we're going to look for sales so we've got the sales here and the measures and we're going to put
sales on child rolls.
And right now that gives us automatically airline chart but we're going to change that to a bar chart
because that is a bit more representative in our case a better representation.
So there we go.
It might be a bit in this particular instance about me a bit too cluttered soldiers make it the reduce
the size to give some room between the buyers.
Okay.
So that's our sales for that for every single month.
The total sales for all of the departments.
So what else we can do now is we can take the category and drag the category into let's say we're going
to drag it into color which will give us these bars like the bars and our colored into three colors
because of the different categories.
But we want to visualize the categories separately so we're going to take categories again and we're
going to drag them into rows.
And this gives us categories separately here.
Now this is a bit too big to fit numbers position so we'll reduce the size and there you go.
So there you have how the categories or the different departments furniture office supplies and technology
have been performing since the start of 2011 all the way up to 2015.
So what we want to do now is we want to add in the sales targets for these departments and see how they
have or have not been meeting those sales targets.
So whereas our data located well it's locked in our second data source cell so let's work on that here
right away.
You can see that familiar orange line on the left meaning that this is a potential secondary data source
to our visualization where you have a primary data source and is marked here for blue a little checkmark
and right away tableau has already recognized that category is a potential field that it can join these
two data sets on because once again the name of the field is the same in both data sets we have a category
here and we have category here.
And the reason why this link is already orange not grey is because as you recall category is already
part of our visualization.
So if category you weren't an overzealous nation and this link would be great.
So we can have a look at that if we just woops if we just take category out momentarily you can see
that the link is great because tableau recognizes that this field is not a part of the resource nation.
So there might not be a need to join on this field.
So we're going to put category back by pressing controls at.
Okay.
So how do we get our dates into this or sorry not dates how do we get our targets into this realization.
Well first things first we know that our joint has to be performed not only on category but also on
month of ordered date and that is because as you recall sometimes we have to join in many fields and
in this particular case the sales targets are set at the month level so they're set for categories or
for the different departments but they're set at the month level.
So let's go back to the data source and have a look here.
You can see that for every single month for the category of furniture there's a separate sales target
for every single month.
So therefore when we are joining two or blending two our existing data we have to blend not just rolled
up category level but also we have to include the month of order date granularity if we just blend right
now with only category as our field that tableau will be blending on.
What will happen is tableau will as you remember tableau sends separate queries to each dataset.
It aggregates to the required level of granularity and then it brings the data back and blends it.
So in this case what would happen is tableau would go back.
It would take all of these roles for furniture.
It would roll them up so it would take the some of the target it would disregard month and would bring
back the some of the target for furniture and it would blended to every single row here.
So that's not what we want we can have a look at that.
So if we take target and we drag it into in here you will see and let's just make it so we if we open
up the target control panel we'll just take out the category from color and we'll just drag it into
detail so that it doesn't affect the color.
Here you can see that the target is always the same 620 1000 which is unreal it's not the right target
here it's also the same.
And here is also the same.
So it's not changing month to month.
And that is because we're not aggregating at us a month of ordered data is being aggregated it's not
being considered as a level of granularity for our chart.
So let's go ahead and fix that.
As you recall we can control the blend or the holder blend is being created through this control box
here.
So we're going to go to Data Editor relationships.
And here you can see we've got the automatic field that has been selected.
So now we're going to change it to custom we'll keep category but also will add in a new one here we
want to use order date but we want to use month of order date and join on also month of order date.
That's good but also month is not just enough because as you remember these are categorical variables
we need to also take the one above month which is year so we have to make sure that the year is also
included others or mix up different months from different years so we'll take a year of order data on
this side and here will also take a year of order date and if we click Okay.
Now as you can see there is a link and now the category or the targets have been adjusted.
And as you can see they're reflecting what is the reality and we can easily check that.
So let's say January 2011 sales target for furniture was five thousand or ten thousand dollars.
If we go to the data source sales target for furniture in January 2011 was ten thousand dollars and
then is gradually increasing.
So that's great.
And now let's just quickly change this from a bar chart to an area chart because it looks better like
that.
And let's quickly have a look at the different targets that these different departments have set themselves.
So you can see that the furniture department has a very linear growing target.
So it's basically got a coefficient that every month the sales should increase by a certain amount then
the office supplies department has quarterly targets so every three months the target is different the
monthly target is different so they basically review their targets every quarter and adjust them accordingly.
Basically is you're not seasonality or expect expected supplies and things like that.
And finally the technology department reviews their targets annually and sets them sets the same target
for the whole year so every month will have the same target.
So it's very interesting how the different departments have different targets and different ways of
setting them and you can see this right away through the data even without talking to management and
understanding their takes on it right away.
You already have this information there.
So that's a very cool part of data discovery.
That is the targets below the actuals.
What we want to do now is we want to combine these charts so we can actually visually compare them very
easily and seamlessly.
So what we're going to do is we're going to create a dual access chart and it is actually much easier
than it sounds.
So it might it might be very hard to do an excel in tableau.
It is extremely simple and I'm going to show you right now how to do it.
So all you have to do is you just right click on your target here and you click dual axis and then one
more thing which a lot of people forget very important second step in a dual axis chart right away you're
right click on this axis on the right here and you click synchronize axis.
That is very very important because if you don't.
As you can see right now they're aligned.
So 40000 of the top 40000 at the top here.
But if you don't synchronize you like I press controls and here so this is synchronized.
This is not synchronized.
You can see that they have separate accesses and that way you can get really confused and the people
reading the chart can get the wrong insights.
So we're going to synchronize access make sure you do that every time and that finalizes the process
of creating a dual access chart.
Of course you can make adjustments further down the track but this is pretty much what it looks like.
And from here you can get insights into each one of the departments so you can see when they're above
the above their target they're meeting the target or exceeding it when they're below they're not.
So here again you can see the same thing.
Right now the gray area chart is in front of the of our bar chart.
We want to put it if we want to put it behind.
We have to just take some target here and drag it to the left.
And that will switch places and as you can see it looks much better now.
The gray chart is behind and you can visually compare for every department to kind of see how they're
performing along the way.
So what I'm going to do is I'm going to make this a bit bigger so the chart looks so we can see the
chart a bit better with bigger bars and increase the size of the bars so go to sales size increase.
So as you can see that already looks really good starting to look very good.
That's how you create a dual axis chart and tableau.
Remember about synchronizing the axes.
It's very important.
And that brings us to the conclusion for today.
Next time we will take this chart one step further and we will introduce a calculated field within the
blend which is a whole different whole separate topic in Tableau and it's important to know how to do
that.
And that will hopefully finalize this chart for us.
So I hope you enjoyed today's tutorial.
I look forward to see you next time.
And until then happy analyzing.